docs: Added v1.0.0 information to upgrade guide (#6560)
aws/karpenter-provider-aws: website/content/en/preview/upgrading/v1-migration.md

---
title: "v1 Migration"
linkTitle: "v1 Migration"
weight: 30
description: >
  Upgrade information for migrating to v1
---

This migration guide is designed to help you migrate Karpenter from a pre-v1 version (v1beta1) to Karpenter v1.
Use this document as a reference to the changes that were introduced in this release and as a guide to how you need to update the manifests and other Karpenter objects you created in previous Karpenter releases.

> Before you begin upgrading to `1.0.0`, you should know that:

Reviewer: Since this is talking about pre-v1 actions, should we ref out to the section where you describe some of pre-v1 actions in the changelog below?

Author: I added this sentence below the bullet list. Should I remove the bullet list as well? 
`See the [Changelog]({{<ref "#changelog" >}}) for details about actions you should take before upgrading to v1.0 or v1.1.`

* Every Karpenter upgrade from pre-v1.0.0 versions must go through an upgrade to minor version `v1.0.0`.
* You must be upgrading to `v1.0.0` from a version of Karpenter that supports NodePools, NodeClaims, and NodeClasses (`0.32.0`+ Karpenter versions support v1beta1 APIs).
* Karpenter `1.0.0`+ supports Karpenter v1 and v1beta1 APIs and will not work with earlier Provisioner, AWSNodeTemplate or Machine alpha APIs. Do not upgrade to `1.0.0`+ without first [upgrading to `0.32.x`]({{<ref "upgrade-guide#upgrading-to-0320" >}}) or later.

> * Because version `1.0.0` supports both the v1beta1 and v1 APIs, it allows you to migrate your existing APIs without experiencing downtime.

Author: I added a modified version of what you said in the upgrade guide and added some of your other words here. Please take a look and suggest any further changes.

## Upgrade Procedure

> This procedure assumes you are running the Karpenter controller on cluster and want to upgrade that cluster to v1.0.0.

Author: Done.

**NOTE**: Please read through the entire procedure before beginning the upgrade. There are major changes in this upgrade, so you should carefully evaluate your cluster and workloads before proceeding.

> 1. Determine the current cluster version: Run the following to make sure that your Karpenter version is between `v0.32.11` and `v0.37.1`:

Author: Done.

   ```bash
   kubectl get pod -A | grep karpenter
   kubectl describe pod -n karpenter karpenter-xxxxxxxxxx-xxxxx | grep Image: 
   ```
   Sample output:
   ```bash
   Image: public.ecr.aws/karpenter/controller:0.37.1@sha256:157f478f5db1fe999f5e2d27badcc742bf51cc470508b3cebe78224d0947674f
   ```

   The Karpenter version you are running must be between minor version `v0.33` and `v0.37`. To be able to roll back from Karpenter v1, you must be on at least the following patch release versions for your minor version, which will include the conversion webhooks for a smooth rollback:

   * v0.37.1
   * v0.36.3
   * v0.35.6
   * v0.34.7
   * v0.33.6

2. Review for breaking changes: If you are already running Karpenter v0.37.x, you can skip this step. If you are running an earlier Karpenter version, you need to review the [Upgrade Guide]({{<ref "upgrade-guide#upgrading-to-0320" >}}) for each minor release.

3. Set environment variables for your cluster:

>    ????? Should we set  KARPENTER_VERSION=v1.0.0 ??????

Author: Good. Done.

    ```bash
    export KARPENTER_NAMESPACE=kube-system

>     export KARPENTER_VERSION=v1.0.0

Author: Done.

    export AWS_PARTITION="aws" # if you are not using standard partitions, you may need to configure to aws-cn / aws-us-gov
    export CLUSTER_NAME="${USER}-karpenter-demo"
    export AWS_REGION="us-west-2"
    export AWS_ACCOUNT_ID="$(aws sts get-caller-identity --query Account --output text)"
    export KARPENTER_IAM_ROLE_ARN="arn:${AWS_PARTITION}:iam::${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}:role/${CLUSTER_NAME}-karpenter"
    export CLUSTER_ENDPOINT="$(aws eks describe-cluster --name ${CLUSTER_NAME} --query "cluster.endpoint" --output text)"
    ```

> 4. Apply the new Karpenter policy and assign it to the existing Karpenter role:

Author: Done. Will we continue to use "preview" as the location for the latest cloudformation.yaml file?

    ```bash
    TEMPOUT=$(mktemp)
    curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/v0.32.10/website/content/en/preview/upgrading/v1beta1-controller-policy.json > ${TEMPOUT}

    AWS_REGION=${AWS_REGION:=$AWS_DEFAULT_REGION} # use the default region if AWS_REGION isn't defined
    POLICY_DOCUMENT=$(envsubst < ${TEMPOUT})
    POLICY_NAME="KarpenterControllerPolicy-${CLUSTER_NAME}-v1beta1"
    ROLE_NAME="${CLUSTER_NAME}-karpenter"

    POLICY_ARN=$(aws iam create-policy --policy-name "${POLICY_NAME}" --policy-document "${POLICY_DOCUMENT}" | jq -r .Policy.Arn)
    aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name "${ROLE_NAME}" --policy-arn "${POLICY_ARN}"
    ```

5. Apply the v1.0.0 Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs):

   ```bash
   KARPENTER_NAMESPACE=kube-system 
   helm upgrade --install karpenter-crd oci://public.ecr.aws/karpenter/karpenter-crd --version 1.0.0 --namespace "${KARPENTER_NAMESPACE}" --create-namespace \
        --set webhook.enabled=true \
        --set webhook.serviceName=karpenter \
        --set webhook.serviceNamespace="${KARPENTER_NAMESPACE}" \
        --set webhook.port=8443
    ```

> 6. Upgrade Karpenter to the new version. At the end of this process, [conversion webhooks](https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/blob/main/charts/karpenter/templates/post-install-hook.yaml) run to convert the Karpenter CRDs to v1. You can choose to add the `--no-hooks` flag to prevent the post-install hook from running in the cluster:

Author: Done.

    ```bash

>     helm upgrade --install karpenter oci://public.ecr.aws/karpenter/karpenter --version ${KARPENTER_VERSION} --namespace kube-system --create-namespace \

Author: Done.

>       --set serviceAccount.annotations."eks\.amazonaws\.com/role-arn"=${KARPENTER_IAM_ROLE_ARN} \

Author: Done.

      --set settings.aws.defaultInstanceProfile=KarpenterNodeInstanceProfile-${CLUSTER_NAME} \
      --set settings.clusterName=${CLUSTER_NAME} \
      --set settings.interruptionQueue=${CLUSTER_NAME} \
      --set controller.resources.requests.cpu=1 \
      --set controller.resources.requests.memory=1Gi \
      --set controller.resources.limits.cpu=1 \
      --set controller.resources.limits.memory=1Gi \
      --wait
    ```

   {{% alert title="Note" color="warning" %}}
   Karpenter has deprecated and moved a number of Helm values as part of the v1 release. Ensure that you upgrade to the newer version of these helm values during your migration to v1. You can find detail for all the settings that were moved in the [v1 Upgrade Reference]({{<ref "#helm-values" >}}).
   {{% /alert %}}

>    Your upgraded Karpenter controller is now installed, with any `v1beta1` workloads continuing to run and be managed by Karpenter.

Author: Done.

> 7. Your NodePool and EC2NodeClass objects should already have been modified during the Karpenter migration. Review and upgrade the following with any further changes as needed:

Author: I added a new "Post upgrade considerations" section and described the option of getting, modifying and changing NodePools and EC2NodeClasses. Let me know what you think.

   * ([NodePools]({{<ref "../concepts/nodepools" >}}): Get the latest copy of your NodePool (`kubectl describe nodepool default > nodepool.yaml`) and review the [Changelog]({{<ref "#changelog" >}}) for changes to NodePool objects. Make modifications as needed.
   * [EC2NodeClasses]({{<ref "../concepts/nodeclasses" >}}): Get the latest copy of your EC2NodeClass (`kubectl describe ec2nodeclass default > ec2nodeclass.yaml`) and review the [Changelog]({{<ref "#changelog" >}}) for changes to EC2NodeClass objects. Make modifications as needed.

8. When you are satisfied with your NodePool and EC2NodeClass files, apply them as follows:

    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f nodepool.yaml
    kubectl apply -f ec2nodeclass.yaml
    ```

> 9. Review changes to Karpenter [Metrics]({{<ref "../reference/metrics" >}}) and change your use of those metric as needed.

Author: Okay. Done.

> 10. Rolling over nodes: There is no need to roll over nodes in most cases. One case where you will need to roll nodes is if you have multiple NodePools with different `kubeletConfiguration`s that are referencing the same EC2NodeClass.

Reviewer: Actually, looks like you have this below -- should this just ref out to the actions that you listed in the changelog below?

> 10. Rolling over nodes: There is no need to roll over nodes in most cases. One case where you will need to roll nodes is if you have multiple NodePools with different `kubeletConfiguration`s that are referencing the same EC2NodeClass.

Author: Okay. The new "Post upgrade consideration" section points to the Changelog.

* **Migrating userData**: Consider migrating your userData ahead of the v1.0.0 upgrade. See the description of `amiSelectorTerms` below.

### Before upgrading to `1.1.0`

Apply the following changes to your NodePools and EC2NodeClasses, as appropriate, before upgrading them to `v1.1.0` (though okay to make these changes for `1.0.0`)

* **v1beta1 support gone**: In `1.1.0`, v1beta1 is not supported. Migrate all Karpenter yaml files ([NodePools]({{<ref "../concepts/nodepools" >}}), [EC2NodeClasses]({{<ref "../concepts/nodeclasses" >}}), and so on) to v1.
Also, know that all resources in the cluster also need to be on v1. It's possible (although unlikely) that some resources still may be stored as v1beta1 in ETCD if no writes had been made to them since the v1 upgrade.
You could use a tool such as [kube-storage-version-migrator](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kube-storage-version-migrator) to handle this.

* **Remove kubelet objects from NodePools**: Check that NodePools no longer contain the kubelet-configuration annotation (`karpenter.sh/v1beta1-kubelet-conversion` annotation).
Karpenter will crash if NodePool resources contain this annotation.

> * **Remove BootstrapMode annotation**: Karpenter will crash if NodePool resources contain the `BootstrapMode` annotation.

Reviewer: @engedaam I don't think that we need to crash if this annotation is still present. Seems like the only one that we should really be crashing on is the kubelet-conversion one -- only because not crashing on it would mean that we are reasoning about the wrong configuration starting on v1.1

This annotation is no longer being added. If you are migrating an Ubuntu NodeClass to v1, you need to remove the `karpenter.k8s.aws/v1beta1-ubuntu` annotation.

* **KubeletConfiguration**: If you have multiple NodePools pointing to the same EC2NodeClass that have different kubeletConfigurations,
then you have to manually intervene to add more EC2NodeClasses and point their NodePools to them.
Otherwise, this will induce drift and you will have to roll your cluster.
If you have multiple NodePools pointing to the same EC2NodeClass, but they have the same configuration, then you can proceed with the migration
without having drift or having any additional NodePools or EC2NodeClasses configured.

> * **amiSelectorTerms and amiFamily**: For v1, `amiFamily` is no longer required if you instead specify an `alias` in `amiSelectorTerms` in your `EC2NodeClass`. However, you need to update those settings if you are using:

Reviewer: I'm not sure that I follow what you mean here.

   * A Custom amiFamily. You must ensure that the node is registered with the `karpenter.sh/unregistered` taint.
   * An Ubuntu AMI, as described earlier.

> ### Update metrics

Reviewer: We're missing environment variable updates here

> ### Update metrics

Reviewer: Can we have a section where we call-out the API changes that we've made? That's the one piece here that I don't see covered that I think is extremely valuable for users to see

> ### Update metrics

Reviewer: There's an update for `consolidationPolicy` from `WhenUnderutilized` to `WhenEmptyOrUnderutilized` that should be covered in the API section as well

> ### Update metrics

Reviewer: Expiration being forceful here also doesn't seem to be covered

> ### Update metrics

Reviewer: An update that we made for topologySpreadConstraints to be DoNotSchedule for zone instead of ScheduleAnyways is also not covered here and is something that we should add

* Karpenter `1.0.0`+ supports Karpenter v1 and v1beta1 APIs and will not work with earlier Provisioner, AWSNodeTemplate or Machine alpha APIs. Do not upgrade to `1.0.0`+ without first [upgrading to `0.32.x`]({{<ref "upgrade-guide#upgrading-to-0320" >}}) or later.
* Because version `1.0.0` supports both the v1beta1 and v1 APIs, it allows you to migrate your existing APIs without experiencing downtime.

## Upgrade Procedure

This procedure assumes you are running the Karpenter controller on cluster and want to upgrade that cluster to v1.0.0.

**NOTE**: Please read through the entire procedure before beginning the upgrade. There are major changes in this upgrade, so you should carefully evaluate your cluster and workloads before proceeding.

1. Determine the current cluster version: Run the following to make sure that your Karpenter version is between `v0.32.11` and `v0.37.1`:
   ```bash
   kubectl get pod -A | grep karpenter
   kubectl describe pod -n karpenter karpenter-xxxxxxxxxx-xxxxx | grep Image: 
   ```
   Sample output:
   ```bash
   Image: public.ecr.aws/karpenter/controller:0.37.1@sha256:157f478f5db1fe999f5e2d27badcc742bf51cc470508b3cebe78224d0947674f
   ```

>    The Karpenter version you are running must be between minor version `v0.32` and `v0.37`. To be able to roll back from Karpenter v1, we recommend that you also be on at least the following patch release versions for your minor version:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The Karpenter version you are running must be between minor version `v0.33` and `v0.37`. To be able to roll back from Karpenter v1, we recommend that you also be on at least the following patch release versions for your minor version:
```

Author: Done.

   * v0.37.1
   * v0.36.3
   * v0.35.6
   * v0.34.7
   * v0.33.6

>    * v0.32.11

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Users are expected to be on v0.33.x or above

Author: Done.

    export KARPENTER_IAM_ROLE_ARN="arn:${AWS_PARTITION}:iam::${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}:role/${CLUSTER_NAME}-karpenter"
    export CLUSTER_ENDPOINT="$(aws eks describe-cluster --name ${CLUSTER_NAME} --query "cluster.endpoint" --output text)"
    ```

4. Apply the new Karpenter policy and assign it to the existing Karpenter role:

    ```bash
    TEMPOUT=$(mktemp)
    curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/v0.32.10/website/content/en/preview/upgrading/v1beta1-controller-policy.json > ${TEMPOUT}

    AWS_REGION=${AWS_REGION:=$AWS_DEFAULT_REGION} # use the default region if AWS_REGION isn't defined
    POLICY_DOCUMENT=$(envsubst < ${TEMPOUT})
    POLICY_NAME="KarpenterControllerPolicy-${CLUSTER_NAME}-v1beta1"
    ROLE_NAME="${CLUSTER_NAME}-karpenter"

    POLICY_ARN=$(aws iam create-policy --policy-name "${POLICY_NAME}" --policy-document "${POLICY_DOCUMENT}" | jq -r .Policy.Arn)
    aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name "${ROLE_NAME}" --policy-arn "${POLICY_ARN}"
    ```

5. Apply the v1.0.0 Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs):

   ?????  I'm not able to try this since CRDs don't seem to exist yet.  ?????

>    ```bash
>    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/v1.0.0/pkg/apis/crds/karpenter.sh_nodepools.yaml
>    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/v1.0.0/pkg/apis/crds/karpenter.sh_nodeclaims.yaml
>    kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/v1.0.0/pkg/apis/crds/karpenter.k8s.aws_ec2nodeclasses.yaml
>     ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
KARPENTER_NAMESPACE=kube-system 
helm upgrade --install karpenter-crd oci://public.ecr.aws/karpenter/karpenter-crd --version 1.0.0 --namespace "${KARPENTER_NAMESPACE}" --create-namespace \
--set webhook.enabled=true \
--set webhook.serviceName=karpenter \
--set webhook.serviceNamespace="${KARPENTER_NAMESPACE}" \
--set webhook.port=8443
```

Author: Done.

6. Upgrade Karpenter to the new version:
   ????? Assuming the karpenter version is 1.0.0, it is not yet available to test.  ?????

    ```bash
    helm upgrade --install karpenter oci://public.ecr.aws/karpenter/karpenter --version ${KARPENTER_VERSION} --namespace kube-system --create-namespace \
      --set serviceAccount.annotations."eks\.amazonaws\.com/role-arn"=${KARPENTER_IAM_ROLE_ARN} \
      --set settings.aws.defaultInstanceProfile=KarpenterNodeInstanceProfile-${CLUSTER_NAME} \
      --set settings.clusterName=${CLUSTER_NAME} \
      --set settings.interruptionQueue=${CLUSTER_NAME} \
      --set controller.resources.requests.cpu=1 \
      --set controller.resources.requests.memory=1Gi \
      --set controller.resources.limits.cpu=1 \
      --set controller.resources.limits.memory=1Gi \
      --wait
    ```

   {{% alert title="Note" color="warning" %}}
   Karpenter has deprecated and moved a number of Helm values as part of the v1 release. Ensure that you upgrade to the newer version of these helm values during your migration to v1. You can find detail for all the settings that were moved in the [v1 Upgrade Reference]({{<ref "#helm-values" >}}).
   {{% /alert %}}

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we metntion that there will be a post install hook that will run and configure the conversion webhooks on the custom resources definition as part of the helm process. https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/blob/main/charts/karpenter/templates/post-install-hook.yaml. Can we also include customer can run with `--no-hooks` flag to prevent the post install hook from running in their cluster.

Author: Done.

   ```yaml
   version: karpenter.k8s.aws/v1beta1
   kind: EC2NodeClass
   spec:
     amiFamily: Ubuntu
     amiSelectorTerms:
     - id: ami-foo
   ---
   # Conversion Webhook Output
   version: karpenter.k8s.aws/v1
   kind: EC2NodeClass
   metadata:
     annotations:
       compatibility.karpenter.k8s.aws/v1beta1-ubuntu: amiFamily,blockDeviceMappings
   spec:
     amiFamily: AL2
     amiSelectorTerms:
     - id: ami-foo
     blockDeviceMappings:
     - deviceName: 'dev/sda1'
       rootVolume: true
       ebs:
         encrypted: true
         volumeType: gp3
         volumeSize: 20Gi
   ```
   **NOTE**: If you do not specify `amiSelectorTerms` before upgrading with an Ubuntu AMI, the conversion webhook will fail. If you do this, downgrade to Karpenter `v0.37.1 and add amiSelectorTerms before upgrading again.

* **Migrating userData**: Consider migrating your userData ahead of the v1.0.0 upgrade. See the description of `amiSelectorTerms` below.

### Before upgrading to `1.1.0`

Apply the following changes to your NodePools and EC2NodeClasses, as appropriate, before upgrading them to `v1.1.0` (though okay to make these changes for `1.0.0`)

> * **v1beta1 support gone**: In `1.1.0`, v1beta1 is not supported. Migrate all Karpenter yaml files ([NodePools]({{<ref "../concepts/nodepools" >}}), [EC2NodeClasses]({{<ref "../concepts/nodeclasses" >}}), and so on) to v1.

Reviewer 2: Can we also call out that rollback to v1beta1 is not supported? Once customers are using `1.1.0`

then you have to manually add more EC2NodeClasses and point their NodePools to them. This will induce drift and you will have to roll your cluster.
If you have multiple NodePools pointing to the same EC2NodeClass, but they have the same configuration, then you can proceed with the migration
without having drift or having any additional NodePools or EC2NodeClasses configured.

* **Remove kubelet annotation from NodePools**: Remove the kubelet-configuration annotation (`compatibility.karpenter.sh/v1beta1-kubelet-conversion` annotation) from your NodePools. This is used to support the KubeletConfiguration migration path above, but is not supported in v1.1.
Karpenter will crash on upgrade if NodePool resources contain this annotation. Users should make sure that their kubelet configurations are migrated prior to upgrading to properly drift their nodes to the correct configurations.

* **amiSelectorTerms and amiFamily**: For v1, `amiFamily` is no longer required if you instead specify an `alias` in `amiSelectorTerms` in your `EC2NodeClass`. You need to update your `amiSelectorTerms` and `amiFamily` if you are using:

>    * A Custom amiFamily. You must ensure that the node you add the `karpenter.sh/unregistered` taint in your UserData.

Reviewer: Doesn't this need to be in the pre-1.0 upgrade notes?

   * An Ubuntu AMI, as described earlier.

### Downgrading
// TODO 

## Full Changelog
* Features: 
  * AMI Selector Terms has a new Alias field which can only be set by itself in `EC2NodeClass.Spec.AMISelectorTerms`

>   * Disruption Budgets by Reason in `NodePool.Spec.Disruption.Budgets`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Disruption Budgets by Reason was added to `NodePool.Spec.Disruption.Budgets`
```

>   * TerminationGracePeriod in the `NodePool.Spec.Template.Spec`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * TerminationGracePeriod was added to `NodePool.Spec.Template.Spec`.
```

  * LOG_OUTPUT_PATHS and LOG_ERROR_OUTPUT_PATHS environment variables added

> * API Rename: NodePool’s ConsolidationPolicy WhenUnderutilized is now renamed to WhenEmptyOrUnderutilized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* API Rename: NodePool’s ConsolidationPolicy `WhenUnderutilized` is now renamed to `WhenEmptyOrUnderutilized`
```

* Behavior Changes: 

>   * Expiration now begins draining as soon as it’s expired. Karpenter does not wait for replacement capacity to be available before draining, but will start provisioning a replacement as soon as the node is expired and begins draining.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Expiration is now forceful and begins draining as soon as it’s expired. Karpenter does not wait for replacement capacity to be available before draining, but will start provisioning a replacement as soon as the node is expired and begins draining.
```

  * Karpenter's generated NodeConfig now takes precedence when generating UserData with the AL2023 `amiFamily`. If you're setting any values managed by Karpenter in your AL2023 UserData, configure these through Karpenter natively (e.g. kubelet configuration fields). 

>   * Karpenter now adds a karpenter.sh/unregistered taint to nodes in injected UserData when using alias in AMISelectorTerms or non-Custom AMIFamily. When using AMIFamily: Custom, users will need to add this taint into their UserData, where Karpenter will automatically remove it when provisioning nodes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Karpenter now adds a `karpenter.sh/unregistered` taint to nodes in injected UserData when using alias in AMISelectorTerms or non-Custom AMIFamily. When using `amiFamily: Custom`, users will need to add this taint into their UserData, where Karpenter will automatically remove it when provisioning nodes. 
```

* API Moves: 
  * ExpireAfter has moved from the `NodePool.Spec.Disruption` block to `NodePool.Spec.Template.Spec`, and is now a drift-able field.

>   * KubeletConfig was moved to the EC2NodeClass from the NodePool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `Kubelet` was moved to the EC2NodeClass from the NodePool.
```

* RBAC changes: added `delete pods` | added `get, patch crds` | added `update nodes` | removed `create nodes`
* Breaking API (Manual Migration Needed): 
  * Ubuntu is dropped as a first class supported AMI Family
  * `karpenter.sh/do-not-consolidate` (annotation), `karpenter.sh/do-not-evict` (annotation), and `karpenter.sh/managed-by` (tag) are all removed. `karpenter.sh/managed-by`, which currently stores the cluster name in its value, will be replaced by eks:eks-cluster-name
  * The taint used to mark nodes for disruption and termination changed from `karpenter.sh/disruption=disrupting:NoSchedule` to `karpenter.sh/disrupted:NoSchedule`. It is not recommended to tolerate this taint, however, if you were tolerating it in your applications, you'll need to adjust your taints to reflect this.
* Environment Variable Changes: 
  * Environment Variable Changes
  * LOGGING_CONFIG, ASSUME_ROLE_ARN, ASSUME_ROLE_DURATION Dropped
  * LEADER_ELECT renamed to DISABLE_LEADER_ELECTION

>   * DRIFT_ENABLED dropped and promoted to Stable, cannot be disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `DRIFT=true` is no longer a `FEATURE_GATE` dropped and promoted to Stable, cannot be disabled.
```

There is no `DRIFT_ENABLED` environment variable -- only a `FEATURE_GATES` environment variable

      * Users currently opting out of drift, disabling the drift feature flag will no longer be able to do so.
* Defaults changed: 

>   * API: Karpenter will drop support for IMDS access from containers by default on new EC2NodeClasses by updating the default of httpPutResponseHopLimit from 2 to 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * API: Karpenter will drop support for IMDS access from containers by default on new EC2NodeClasses by updating the default of `httpPutResponseHopLimit` from 2 to 1.
```

  * API: ConsolidateAfter is required. Users couldn’t set this before with ConsolidationPolicy: WhenUnderutilized, where this is now required. Users can set it to 0 to have the same behavior as in v1beta1. 

>   * API: NodeClassRef fields are now all required, and apiVersion has been renamed to group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * API: All NodeClassRef fields are now all required, and apiVersion has been renamed to group
```

  * API: AMISelectorTerms are required. Setting an Alias cannot be done with any other type of term, and must match the AMI Family that's set or be Custom.
  * Helm: Deployment spec TopologySpreadConstraint to have required zonal spread over preferred. Users who had one node running their Karpenter deployments need to either:
    * Have two nodes in different zones to ensure both Karpenter replicas schedule
    * Scale down their Karpenter replicas from 2 to 1 in the helm chart
    * Edit and relax the topology spread constraint in their helm chart from DoNotSchedule to ScheduleAnyway

>   * Helm: controller.METRICS_PORT default changed back to 8080

Reviewer: This isn't just helm specific. This was also a default that was changed generally in the binary as well

* If you need to rollback the upgrade to v1, you need to upgrade to a special patch version of the minor version you came from. For instance, if you came from v0.33.5, you'll need to downgrade back to v0.33.6. More details on how to do this in [Downgrading]({{<ref "#downgrading" >}}).

See the [Changelog]({{<ref "#changelog" >}}) for details about actions you should take before upgrading to v1.0 or v1.1.

## Upgrade Procedure

Please read through the entire procedure before beginning the upgrade. There are major changes in this upgrade, so please evaluate the list of breaking changes before continuing.

> 1. Determine the current cluster version: Run the following to check your Karpenter version:

Reviewer 3: nit: this read to me as the Kubernetes version (e.g. 1.30)
```suggestion
1. Determine the current Karpenter version by running the following check:
```

    ```

5. Apply the v1.0.0 Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs):

   ```bash
   KARPENTER_NAMESPACE=kube-system 
   helm upgrade --install karpenter-crd oci://public.ecr.aws/karpenter/karpenter-crd --version "${KARPENTER_VERSION}" --namespace "${KARPENTER_NAMESPACE}" --create-namespace \
        --set webhook.enabled=true \
        --set webhook.serviceName=karpenter \
        --set webhook.serviceNamespace="${KARPENTER_NAMESPACE}" \
        --set webhook.port=8443
    ```

6. Upgrade Karpenter to the new version. At the end of this step, conversion webhooks run to convert the Karpenter CRDs to v1.

    ```bash
    helm upgrade --install karpenter oci://public.ecr.aws/karpenter/karpenter --version ${KARPENTER_VERSION} --namespace "${KARPENTER_NAMESPACE}" --create-namespace \
      --set settings.clusterName=${CLUSTER_NAME} \
      --set settings.interruptionQueue=${CLUSTER_NAME} \
      --set controller.resources.requests.cpu=1 \
      --set controller.resources.requests.memory=1Gi \
      --set controller.resources.limits.cpu=1 \
      --set controller.resources.limits.memory=1Gi \
      --wait
    ```

   {{% alert title="Note" color="warning" %}}

>    Karpenter has deprecated and moved a number of Helm values as part of the v1 release. Ensure that you upgrade to the newer version of these helm values during your migration to v1. You can find detail for all the settings that were moved in the [v1 Upgrade Reference]({{<ref "#helm-values" >}}).

Reviewer 4: added as TODO

### Changes required before upgrading to `v1.0.0`

Apply the following changes to your NodePools and EC2NodeClasses, as appropriate, before upgrading them to v1.

* **Deprecated annotations, labels and tags are removed for v1.0.0**: For v1, `karpenter.sh/do-not-consolidate` (annotation), `karpenter.sh/do-not-evict
(annotation)`, and `karpenter.sh/managed-by` (tag) all have support removed.
The `karpenter.sh/managed-by`, which currently stores the cluster name in its value, is replaced by `eks:eks-cluster-name`, to allow
for [EKS Pod Identity ABAC policies](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/pod-id-abac.html).

* **Zap logging removed**: Support for setting the Zap logging config was deprecated in beta and is now removed for v1. View the [Logging Configuration Section of the v1beta1 Migration Guide]({{<ref "../../v0.32/upgrading/v1beta1-migration#logging-configuration-is-no-longer-dynamic" >}}) for more details.

* **metadataOptions could break workloads**: If you have workload pods that are not using `hostNetworking`, the updated default `metadataOptions` could cause your containers to break when you apply new EC2NodeClasses on v1.

> * **Support for native Ubuntu AMI selection is dropped**: If you are using Ubuntu and not using `amiSelectorTerms`, be aware that Karpenter v1 no longer natively supports Ubuntu. To continue using Ubuntu in v1, you can update `amiSelectorTerms` in your EC2NodeClasses to identify Ubuntu as the AMI you want to use. See [reimplement amiFamily](https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/pull/6569) for an example. Once you have done that, you can leave the amiFamily as Ubuntu and proceed to upgrading to v1. This will result in the following Transformation:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Support for native Ubuntu AMI selection is dropped**: If you are using Ubuntu and not using `amiSelectorTerms`, be aware that Karpenter v1 no longer natively supports Ubuntu. To continue using Ubuntu in v1, you can update `amiSelectorTerms` in your EC2NodeClasses to identify Ubuntu as the AMI you want to use. See [reimplement amiFamily](https://github.com/aws/karpenter-provider-aws/pull/6569) for an example. Once you have done that, you can leave the amiFamily as Ubuntu and proceed to upgrading to v1. This will result in the following transformation:
```

Reviewer 4: must've been an unconscious add :D

   ```yaml
   version: karpenter.k8s.aws/v1beta1
   kind: EC2NodeClass
   spec:
     amiFamily: Ubuntu
     amiSelectorTerms:
     - id: ami-foo
   ---
   # Conversion Webhook Output
   version: karpenter.k8s.aws/v1
   kind: EC2NodeClass
   metadata:
     annotations:
       compatibility.karpenter.k8s.aws/v1beta1-ubuntu: amiFamily,blockDeviceMappings
   spec:
     amiFamily: AL2
     amiSelectorTerms:
     - id: ami-foo
     blockDeviceMappings:

>      - deviceName: 'dev/sda1'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - deviceName: '/dev/sda1'
```

       rootVolume: true
       ebs:
         encrypted: true
         volumeType: gp3
         volumeSize: 20Gi
   ```

>    **NOTE**: If you do not specify `amiSelectorTerms` before upgrading with an Ubuntu AMI, the conversion webhook will fail. If you do this, downgrade to Karpenter `v0.37.1 and add amiSelectorTerms before upgrading again.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   **NOTE**: If you do not specify `amiSelectorTerms` before upgrading with the Ubuntu `amiFamily`, the conversion webhook will fail. If you do this, downgrade to Karpenter `v0.37.1` and add `amiSelectorTerms` before upgrading again.
```

> * **Migrating userData**: Consider migrating your userData ahead of the v1.0.0 upgrade. See the description of `amiSelectorTerms` below.

Reviewer 3: What actionable changes are there for migrating UserData? I don't think there should be anything with the current conversion strategy right?

Reviewer 4: don't know, dropped

* **amiSelectorTerms and amiFamily**: For v1, `amiFamily` is no longer required if you instead specify an `alias` in `amiSelectorTerms` in your `EC2NodeClass`. You need to update your `amiSelectorTerms` and `amiFamily` if you are using:
   * A Custom amiFamily. You must ensure that the node you add the `karpenter.sh/unregistered` taint in your UserData.
   * An Ubuntu AMI, as described earlier.

### Downgrading
// TODO 

## Full Changelog
* Features: 
  * AMI Selector Terms has a new Alias field which can only be set by itself in `EC2NodeClass.Spec.AMISelectorTerms`
  * Disruption Budgets by Reason in `NodePool.Spec.Disruption.Budgets`
  * TerminationGracePeriod in the `NodePool.Spec.Template.Spec`.
  * LOG_OUTPUT_PATHS and LOG_ERROR_OUTPUT_PATHS environment variables added
* API Rename: NodePool’s ConsolidationPolicy WhenUnderutilized is now renamed to WhenEmptyOrUnderutilized
* Behavior Changes: 
  * Expiration now begins draining as soon as it’s expired. Karpenter does not wait for replacement capacity to be available before draining, but will start provisioning a replacement as soon as the node is expired and begins draining.

>   * Users with AL2023 setting values in their UserData with a configurable field in the Kubelet Config will be overridden, to ensure that Karpenter knows what the correct state is when provisioning. 

Reviewer 3: nit: wording, just think this is a little easier to follow
```suggestion
  * Karpenter's generated NodeConfig now takes precedence when generating UserData with the AL2023 `amiFamily`. If you're setting any values managed by Karpenter in your AL2023 UserData, configure these through Karpenter natively (e.g. kubelet configuration fields). 
```

>   * Karpenter now adds a karpenter.sh/unregistered taint to nodes in injected UserData when using alias in AMISelectorTerms or AMIFamily. When using AMIFamily: Custom, users will need to add this taint into their UserData, where Karpenter will automatically remove it when provisioning nodes. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Karpenter now adds a karpenter.sh/unregistered taint to nodes in injected UserData when using alias in AMISelectorTerms or non-custom AMIFamily. When using AMIFamily: Custom, users will need to add this taint into their UserData, where Karpenter will automatically remove it when provisioning nodes. 
```

* API Moves: 
  * ExpireAfter has moved from the `NodePool.Spec.Disruption` block to `NodePool.Spec.Template.Spec`, and is now a drift-able field.
  * KubeletConfig was moved to the EC2NodeClass from the NodePool.
* RBAC changes: added `delete pods` | added `get, patch crds` | added `update nodes` | removed `create nodes`
* Breaking API (Manual Migration Needed): 
  * Ubuntu is dropped as a first class supported AMI Family
  * `karpenter.sh/do-not-consolidate` (annotation), `karpenter.sh/do-not-evict` (annotation), and `karpenter.sh/managed-by` (tag) are all removed. `karpenter.sh/managed-by`, which currently stores the cluster name in its value, will be replaced by eks:eks-cluster-name

>   * The taint used to mark nodes for disruption and termination changed from `karpenter.sh/disruption=disrupting:NoSchedule` to `karpenter.sh/disrupted:NoSchedule`. It is not recommended to tolerate this taint unless you know what you're doing. If you were tolerating it in your applications, you'll need to adjust your taints to reflect this.

Reviewer 3: nit: I'd take a harder stance that this is just not recommended.
```suggestion
  * The taint used to mark nodes for disruption and termination changed from `karpenter.sh/disruption=disrupting:NoSchedule` to `karpenter.sh/disrupted:NoSchedule`. It is not recommended to tolerate this taint, however if you were tolerating it in your applications, you'll need to adjust your taints to reflect this.
```
